well earlier my colleague soel Raman
spoke to mads Gilbert a Norwegian Doctor
Who's worked in hospitals in Gaza and
his contact with his colleagues there he
rejected israeli's accusation Israel's
accusations that herass uses hospitals
for military
purposes I have been walking around in
these hospitals all over with my camera
documenting patients and the work during
the crisis situations I've been filming
picturing talking to people there has
been no one door locked I have never
been controlled with my documentation
there has absolutely been not a single
restriction in either of these two
hospitals I know the AL Hospital from
the time it was built and as you may
know there is a new medical Block in the
shifa hospital under International
surveillance and during all these years
having worked in these two hospitals I
have never ever traced any sign of any
military or political Command Center and
if the Israelis for these last 16 years
because they started these lies already
in 2009 if they cannot provide any
evidence or any proof how can we look at
this as anything else but the fog of war
the lies and the and more importantly
the wishing of intimidating scaring
people and getting excuses to bomb these
important hospitals and and don't forget
these hospitals are cornerstones of the
welfare and the health care for 2.2
million people and when a a when when an
army is allowed to threaten patients in
a hospital and threaten to bomb it when
there is absolutely no evidence and by
the way international law the Geneva
Convention has three rules it is
proportionality use the same amount of
weapon as your enemy it is precaution
don't hit civilian targets and it is
distinction the precaution is that if a
Target is a mixed military civilian
Target the civilian interest take
priority over the military so regardless
but turning back to your question no nor
have I nor have Dr Eric or any other
Norwegian healthcare workers who have
been working with the Palestinian
healthcare for more than 30 years we
have never seen any evidence and had I
seen it I would not have worked there
because I live according to the Geneva
Convention so um show us the show us the
proof that's a Norwegian Dr Matts
Gilbert who knows hospitals in Gaza very
well H let's take this on we can speak
now to Jeffrey Robertson who's a former
United Nations war crimes judge joins me
live from London and Mr Robertson you're
very well acquainted through your work
as a human rights barister with uh
assessing the horrors of War and the
legalities of War indeed how do you view
what is going on in Gaza right now well
there's no question of how I view it
it's a question of how international law
views it and the answer is very clear
there is an absolute Red Line against
bombing hospitals unless you can prove
and the burden is on the aggressor to
prove that they're being used as a milit
for military purposes and uh primer
facing is what lawyers say on the face
of it the bombing of a hospital is uh
clear International crime of course you
you can't avoid that by giving warnings
as the wh said the uh a hospital that
has patients pregnant women and so forth
there's no doubt about this hospital
having uh many of those can't just
evacuate without casualties and patients
will be will die and will uh be severely
injured as a result so what are we to do
with a government Mr Netanyahu and his
cabinet ministers it seems to me that
they are now open to indictment for this
war crime okay let before we move on to
that I want to come on to that in a
second
Mr forgive me for interrupting you I
want to come on to that in just a
attack could also be indicted but the
Israeli Min must realize that they face
indictment not only by the IC M the
prosecutor is rather busy with Mr Putin
at the moment but anywhere they go in
the world in years to come because many
nations have got Universal jurisdiction
laws as they're called and there will be
a attempts to arrest and put them on
trial and they will be convicted unless
they can show that the hospital is a
military Tong the Rockets are shot from
there that it Harbors Hamas Fighters or
whatever but that burden is on them and
so they are vulnerable if they go ahead
with bombing this hospital today or
tonight okay Mr Robson I'm hoping you
can hear me okay uh I just wanted to
clear understand one thing to clear one
thing up so if there are Hamas if there
are Hamas operatives underneath the
hospitals is the hospital a legitimate
Target given that there are I think
something like 14,000 people Sheltering
there and 400
patients well that's what lawyers are
like or judges are likely to call
disproportionate but it is clearly an
argument it's certainly an argument for
going in with soldiers and securing the
hospital without hurting the patients
and maybe and digging underneath it to
see what can be found if you've got a
reasonable apprehension that there are
military targets underneath but I would
have thought that it's difficult to
argue that you should bomb a hospital as
such uh would do anything to
alleviate that problem so again the
burden is on the Israeli government to
show that it
is that the attack is proportionate to
the
threat what is the process of bringing
people that you're alluding to just just
now of bringing people to Justice and
and is it ever likely to happen given
the warm embrace of Israel's actions by
the United
States well that is the big question of
course as to the
enforceability of international law in
my view there is a basis for the IC to
take action the international criminal
court uh and it would have the power to
indict the leaders of Hamas who are
guilty
let's let's actually accept that of
giving the most horrible orders to uh
their soldiers so to speak to kill not
just
Israeli uh soldiers but citizens and uh
who were wickedly Des spoiled uh on
October the 7th but two wrongs don't
make a right and the Israeli government
must be careful not itself to commit War
crime
because not only could it be prosecuted
at the ICC it doesn't accept the ICC
regrettably so it's not it can claim not
to be bound by but it does pretend to
comply with international law and if it
doesn't by bombing hospitals without
military
justification then its members the
people of the war cabinet Mr Netanyahu
and his ministers could be prosecuted in
years to come in those countries which
perit International jurisdiction and
will uh undoubtedly uh Levy prosecutions
against them if they visit and so that's
something they have to bear in mind
Jeffrey Robinson we appreciate your
analysis and expertise that's Jeffrey
Robinson a former United Nations War
crime judge thank you